1. Project Overview
This project implements a deductive reasoning system using the Prolog programming language. The goal is to solve a fictional murder mystery involving Dr. Black by modeling character relationships, activities, and evidence as facts and rules within a knowledge base. The system allows an investigator to query this knowledge base to systematically narrow down potential suspects and ultimately identify the murderer based on specific logical criteria.
2. Technical Implementation
The system is built entirely within a single Prolog file using a declarative programming paradigm.
2.1. Knowledge Representation (Facts)
Static information about the scenario is represented using ground predicates (facts).
Predicate	Arity	Description	Examples
man / woman	1	Defines character genders.	man(dr_black).
victim	1	Identifies the deceased.	victim(dr_black).
stay_in	2	Maps characters to rooms.	stay_in(miss_scarlett, room_21).
owns_revolver	1	Identifies who legally owns a weapon.	owns_revolver(reverend_green).
Various activities	1	Tracks hobbies/actions (e.g., smoker, gardening).	smoker(mrs_white).
2.2. Logic and Rules (Deductive Rules)
Deductive rules use logical inference (:- meaning "if") to derive new information from existing facts.
Rule Head	Description	Key Prolog Features Used
suspect(X)	A person is a suspect if they are a man or a woman and not the victim.	Unification, logical OR (;), negation (\+)
has_alibi(X)	A suspect has an alibi if they were playing cards.	Conjunction (,)
share_room(X, Y)	Two distinct individuals share a room if they are both listed as staying in the same room R.	Variable binding, inequality (\=)
revolver_access(X)	Access is granted by ownership or sharing a room with an owner.	Logical OR (;), conjunction (,)
guilty(X)	(The final deduction rule) Defines the murderer based on the intersection of several criteria.	Conjunction (,), negation (\+)
3. Methodology and Problem Solving
The investigation proceeds in structured steps, using the power of constraint satisfaction inherent in Prolog:
Identify the Suspect Pool: An initial query ?- suspect(X). establishes the boundary of the investigation, excluding the victim.
Filter by Evidence (Guilt Condition): The specific evidence gathered at the crime scene (muddy footprints, no alibi, access to a specific weapon type) is translated directly into a single, complex logic rule:
prolog
guilty(X) :- 
    suspect(X), 
    went_outside(X), 
    \+ has_alibi(X), 
    revolver_access(X).
Use code with caution.

This rule acts as a filter, allowing only individuals who satisfy all necessary conditions to match the guilty(X) predicate.
4. Results and Conclusion
By loading the knowledge base into a Prolog interpreter (like SWI-Prolog) and executing the final query:
prolog
?- guilty(X).
Use code with caution.

The system logically processes all facts and rules simultaneously. The expected output would be the name(s) of the character(s) who satisfy every condition specified in the guilty rule.
This project successfully demonstrates how logic programming can be used to manage structured data and solve complex, constraint-based problems efficiently, mimicking the process of a structured criminal investigation.



